10 CHAPTER  1Welcome to computer vision
CAN MACHINE  LEARNING  ACHIEVE  BETTER  PERFORMANCE  THAN THE HUMAN  BRAIN ?
Well, if you had asked me this question 10 years ago, I would’ve probably said no,
machines cannot surpass the accuracy of a human. But let’s take a look at the follow-
ing two scenarios: 
Suppose you were given a book of 10,000 dog images, classified by breed, and
you were asked to learn the properties of each breed. How long would it take
you to study the 130 breeds in 10,000 images? And if you were given a test of
100 dog images and asked to label them based on what you learned, out of the
100, how many would you get right? Well, a neural network that is trained in a
couple of hours can achieve more than 95% accuracy.
On the creation side, a neural network can study the patterns in the strokes, col-
ors, and shading of a particular piece of art. Based on this analysis, it can then
transfer the style from the original artwork into a new image and create a new
piece of original art within a few seconds.
Recent AI and DL advances have allowed machines to surpass human visual ability in
many image classification and object detection applications, and capacity is rapidly
expanding to many other applications. But don’t take my word for it. In the next sec-
tion, we’ll discuss some of the most popular CV applications using DL technology.
1.2 Applications of computer vision
Computers began to be able to recognize human faces in images decades ago, but now
AI systems are rivaling the ability of computers to classify objects in photos and videos.
Thanks to the dramatic evolution in both computational power and the amount of data
available, AI and DL have managed to achieve superhuman performance on many com-
plex visual perception tasks like image search and captioning, image and video classifi-
cation, and object detection. Moreover, deep neural networks are not restricted to
CV tasks: they are also successful at natural language processing and voice user inter-
face tasks. In this book, we’ll focus on visual applications that are applied in CV tasks. 
 DL is used in many computer vision applications to recognize objects and their
behavior. In this section, I’m not going to attempt to list all the CV applications that are
out there. I would need an entire book for that. Instead, I’ll give you a bird’s-eye view of
some of the most popular DL algorithms and their possible applications across different
industries. Among these industries are autonomous cars, drones, robots, in-store cam-
eras, and medical diagnostic scanners that can detect lung cancer in early stages.
1.2.1 Image classification
Image classification  is the task of assigning to an image a label from a predefined set of
categories. A  convolutional neural network  is a neural network type that truly shines in
processing and classifying images in many different applications:
Lung cancer diagnosis —Lung cancer is a growing problem. The main reason lung
cancer is very dangerous is that when it is diagnosed, it is usually in the middle or


------------------------


18 CHAPTER  1Welcome to computer vision
DEFINITIONS An image classifier  is an algorithm that takes in an image as input
and outputs a label or “class” that identifies that image. A class (also called a
category ) in machine learning is the output category of your data.
Here is how the image flows through the classification pipeline:
1A computer receives visual input from an imaging device like a camera. This
input is typically captured as an image or a sequence of images forming a video.
2Each image is then sent through some preprocessing steps whose purpose is to
standardize the images. Common preprocessing steps include resizing an
image, blurring, rotating, changing its shape, or transforming the image from
one color to another, such as from color to grayscale. Only by standardizing the
images—for example, making them the same size—can you then compare
them and further analyze them.
3We extract features. Features  are what help us define objects, and they are usu-
ally information about object shape or color. For example, some features that
distinguish a motorcycle are the shape of the wheels, headlights, mudguards,
and so on. The output of this process is a feature vector  that is a list of unique
shapes that identify the object.
4The features are fed into a classification model . This step looks at the feature vec-
tor from the previous step and predicts the class of the image. Pretend that you
are the classifier model for a few minutes, and let’s go through the classification
process. You look at the list of features in the feature vector one by one and try
to determine what’s in the image:
aFirst you see a wheel  feature; could this be a car, a motorcycle, or a dog?
Clearly it is not a dog, because dogs don’t have wheels (at least, normal dogs,
not robots). Then this could be an image of a car or a motorcycle.
bYou move on to the next feature, the headlight s. There is a higher probability
that this is a motorcycle than a car.
cThe next feature is rear mudguards —again, there is a higher probability that
it is a motorcycle.1. Input data 2. Preprocessing
• Geometric
transforming
• Image blurring3. Feature extraction
P(motorcycle) = 0.854. Classiﬁer
Features vectorP(car) = 0.14
P(dog) = 0.01
Figure 1.14 Using the machine learning model to predict the probability of the motorcycle object from the 
motorcycle, car, and dog classes


------------------------


27 Feature extraction
1.6 Feature extraction
Feature extraction  is a core component of the CV pipeline. In fact, the entire DL model
works around the idea of extracting useful features that clearly define the objects in
the image. So we’ll spend a little more time here, because it is important that you
understand what a feature is, what a vector of features is, and why we extract features.
DEFINITION A feature in machine learning is an individual measurable prop-
erty or characteristic of an observed phenomenon. Features are the input that
you feed to your ML model to output a prediction or classification. Suppose
you want to predict the price of a house: your input features (properties)
might include square_foot , number_of_rooms , bathrooms , and so on, and
the model will output the predicted price based on the values of your fea-
tures. Selecting good features that clearly distinguish your objects increases
the predictive power of ML algorithms.
1.6.1 What is a feature in computer vision?
In CV, a feature is a measurable piece of data in your image that is unique to that spe-
cific object. It may be a distinct color or a specific shape such as a line, edge, or image
segment. A good feature is used to distinguish objects from one another. For example,
if I give you a feature like a wheel and ask you to guess whether an object is a motorcy-
cle or a dog, what would your guess be? A motorcycle. Correct! In this case, the wheel
is a strong feature that clearly distinguishes between motorcycles and dogs. However,
if I give you the same feature (a wheel) and ask you to guess whether an object is a
bicycle or a motorcycle, this feature is not strong enough to distinguish between those
objects. You need to look for more features like a mirror, license plate, or maybe a
pedal, that collectively describe an object. In ML projects, we want to transform the
raw data (image) into a feature vector to show to our learning algorithm, which can
learn the characteristics of the object (figure 1.22).
 In the figure, we feed the raw input image of a motorcycle into a feature extraction
algorithm. Let’s treat the feature extraction algorithm as a black box for now, and we
will come back to it. For now, we need to know that the extraction algorithm produces
a vector that contains a list of features. This feature vector is a 1D array that makes a
robust representation of the object.You must make certain assumptions about the dataset and the problem you are try-
ing to solve. For some datasets, it is best to convert the colored images to grayscale,
while for other datasets, you might need to keep or adjust the color images.
The good news is that, unlike traditional machine learning, DL algorithms require min-
imum data preprocessing because, as you will see soon, neural networks do most of
the heavy lifting in processing an image and extracting features.


------------------------


